2022-04-26

-----

Disclaimer: The authors and contributors to this site cannot be responsible for the results of your use of the information contained in or linked from this site. We attempt to provide accurate information but many factors that are beyond our control can contribute to less than expected results. You are responsible for ensuring the accuracy and applicability of any information you use to make a decision.

Foreword: There are many USB WiFi adapters that work without the need to install a driver in Linux. These adapters use drivers that are already in the Linux kernel. These drivers are maintained in the kernel without the need for user intervention, although, if you want to help with the code, you are welcome to do so. With adapters that use in-kernel drivers, simply plug the adapter in and it will work. Many people find that using adapters with in-kernel drivers is a better solution than using an adapter that requires drivers to be found (not easy to find the right driver), downloaded, compiled (confusing for those that are not developers) and installed (problematic, depending on the Linux distro).

-----

## USB WiFi Adapter Information for Linux

USB WiFi adapters provide flexibility as they are easily moved from one location to another and from one computer to another and can even be taken on the road. They come in models for USB 2 and USB 3. Some of the larger adapters work well for desktop use and the smaller adapters, including "nano" adapters, work well for laptops and travel. It is important that you pick an adapter to match the expected usage. If you are going to be traveling with the adapter, the adapters with long antennas may not not work well as the adapter may be broken. On the other hand, if you need an adapter for a desktop system that is on the other end of the house from your AP/Router, you probably need the better signal capability of the larger antennas. Researching the issue before buying is a good idea.

Linux enjoys very good in-kernel hardware support in many areas but in-kernel support is somewhat limited when it comes to USB WiFi adapters. The main reason for the limited support is that there are only 2 companies supplying chipsets for USB Wifi adapters - Mediatek and Realtek. Intel is not supplying USB capable chipsets and Atheros is not supplying modern USB capable chipsets. Of the two suppliers that do provide USB Wifi chipsets, Mediatek supports drivers for their chipsets the right way, in-kernel. Mediatek drivers are Linux Wireless standards compliant and are updated constantly without users having to worry about it. Realtek does not support their modern USB Wifi chipsets with in-kernel drivers. Realtek does make non-standards compliant Linux drivers but does not publically release them or take problem reports. A very limited number of vendors post Realtek USB WiFi drivers at very irregular intervals. These drivers are released in source code format and must be compiled to be used. The Realtek drivers do not keep up with the needed changes as new kernels are released. This job seems to rest with folks like myself in the community. Am I a fan of how the Realtek USB team supports the Linux community? No. What do I recommend? Buy adapters based on chipsets from the company that is doing it right - Mediatek. The biggest problem most Linux users have when looking to purchase a USB WiFi adapter is being able to reliably identify which adapters have in-kernel support and that is really the reason for this site. Spreading this information far and wide is key to having happy Linux users so please do spread this information.

This document attempts to identify currently available adapters that use in-kernel driver support. Links are provided to online products. Information regarding out-of-kernel drivers and their quality is also provided. The hope is that this information is of benefit to Linux users, experienced and new. Links to products from a wide variety of retailers are provided and we welcome you to send additional links that can be included. The chipsets are shown in each category and if you are able to find an adapter with the listed chipset, even if it is not an adapter that is specifically listed, it should work.

[Linux Wireless - Mediatek](https://wireless.wiki.kernel.org/en/users/drivers/mediatek) is a good place to get an idea of the various Mediatek wifi chipsets that are supported in the Linux kernel. If you want to look in the kernel to see the drivers, [look here](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/tree/master/drivers/net/wireless/mediatek). One of the biggest advantages of using adapters with in-kernel drivers is that any of us can report [bugs](https://wireless.wiki.kernel.org/en/users/documentation/reporting_bugs) and submit fixes. There is no way that I am aware of to report bugs to Realtek.

Warning: It is common for online retailers to post "Linux support." It is best to ignore "Linux support" in online ads as this statement is often misleading at best and false at worst. Most inexperienced users do not understand that the Linux kernel is under constant development which makes it necessary for drivers to be regularly updated in order to work on newer kernels. Out-of-kernel drivers sitting on a CD or on an adapter seller's web site do not get regular updates. Rule of thumb: Never attempt to install a Linux driver from a CD. Only consider downloading a Linux driver from an adapter seller's website if you confirm it supports the kernel you are using first. The out-of-kernel drivers on that CD or seller's webisite will likely be old and will likely do nothing more than make a mess of your system. Remember that `sudo` is a weapon of mass destruction if used without knowing what you are doing. Another rule of thumb: Don't take hardware advice from Windows and MAC users. All major Linux distributions have active forums with users ready to give advice. Don't take advice from a single user but seek advice from several users and always ask if the adapter uses in-kernel drivers.

Note: Some USB WiFi adapters have proprietary Windows drivers onboard. When plugged in, they act like a flash drive or CDROM and on Windows will attempt to start installing the Windows driver. That won't work on Linux or MAC or any other non-Windows OS so the adapter sits there in flash drive or CDROM mode. The problem is that the state of the adapter has to be changed for the adapter to show up as the device that you expect, in this case, a WiFi adapter. Most modern Linux distributions ship with a utility called "usb-modeswitch" that will handle this issue for you if it has the correct information for your adapter. It is a good utility but if you buy adapters that are "multi-state," that is one more potential headache you may have to deal with when something goes wrong. Often you can indentify adapters that are "multi-state" as they are advertised as "free driver" or "free installation driver." If you are looking to buy a USB WiFi adapter for use on Linux, MAC OS, NIX or anything besides Windows, it is a good idea to give preference to single-state adapters.

Note: I will not list any products made by TP-Link and D-Link. Both companies regularly change chipsets while keeping the same model number on their products. This makes it very difficult for Linux users to buy a product with a specific chipset with any degree of certainty. This also makes it difficult for me to post links and recommendations so I will not do so but that is okay because there are many good adapters available. TP-Link and D-Link's Linux support is very poor as their product support sites generally only contain very old Linux drivers that won't work with modern distros... if they post any drivers at all and neither company does a good job of supplying adapters that use in-kernel drivers. We know that Linux cannot be properly supported in the manner that both companies use. This is sad because both companies have made a lot of money from Linux by using it inside many of their products, yet they do not return the support. My recommendation is to avoid TP-Link and D-Link products.

Note: Adapters made by two companies need to be highlighted. Every single USB adapter that Panda makes is supported by Linux in-kernel drivers. The quality and reliability of most [Panda](http://www.pandawireless.com/) and almost all [Alfa](https://www.alfa.com.tw/) adapters is good... really good. Not all Alfa adapters use in-kernel drivers. The Alfa adapters that do use in-kernel drivers are listed below. Products by both companies are widely available.

WPA-3 SAE support: 2120-09-15 - My testing over the last few months has shown very positive results for WPA3 as far as in-kernel drivers are concerned. I have tested adapters ranging from N150 to AC1300. It appears that all of the adapters listed here that use Mediatek/Ralink and Atheros chipsets and in-kernel drivers are working well regarding WPA-3. Keep in mind that your Linux distro must support WPA-3 for WPA-3 to work. Based on upstream work and work on core distros, I expect that we will see WPA3 working well on the newest releases of almost all popular Linux distros by mid-2022. Many distros already work well.

USB extension cables with cradles can be very useful with USB WiFi adapters as they will allow you to position the adapter for best performance. Cables for USB2 and USB3 are available. The following cables are shown as  examples:

[StarTech.com 5ft USB 2.0 Extension Cable](https://www.amazon.com/5ft-Desktop-USB-Extension-Cable/dp/B001K9BFB8)

[Cablecc USB 3.0 Type-A Male to Female Extension Dock Station Docking Cable](https://www.amazon.com/Cablecc-Female-Extension-Station-Docking/dp/B07SH4RZ6S)

[WiFi Adapter Extension Cable with Pedestal](https://smile.amazon.com/gp/product/B08R2Y53QK?ref=em_1p_0_im&ref_=pe_3681270_598503160)

Note: Some adapters won't work with some extension cables and cradles. It is best to buy from retailers that will let you return their products as it seems the only way to know is trial and error.

Important: Price and availability of listed adapters is subject to change. Updating the list of adapters does take a considerable amount of time. I try to complete a review of the links at least once per month. This site has increased in popularity to the point that readers of this site may cause inventory problems for some sellers at times so you may need to wait for inventory to be refreshed. To help with this problem, I have listed multiple links from multiple sellers for some products. If you see any problems, please post in `Issues.`

Market Conditions: 2022-03-27 - Good adapters are available. The market seems to be stablizing but prices for some products are still higher than we would like to see. The global shortage of chips caused by fab plants being shut down for periods during 2020/2021 and the inadequate investment in new fab plants for many years has led to tight markets that have caused high and rising prices for some products and shortages of some products. This problem has recently been compounded by international shipping problems and continued outbreaks of COVID-19. This may continue for some time...possibly into 2023. If you are on a budget, you might want to consider "used" adapters as they are available.
